Chapter 6

Layered network models
In this chapter, we present the definition of the LayeredNetwork class, which encodes the support in L INE
for a class of generalized layered stochastic networks. In their basic form, these models are called layered
queueing networks (LQNs) and differ from regular queueing networks as servers, in order to process jobs,
can issue synchronous and asynchronous calls among each others. We point to [30] and to the LQNS user
manual for an introduction [31]. Contrary to the original LQNs, layered networks in L INE can also include
non-queueing servers, such as caches, hence they may be conceptualized as more general layered stochastic
networks.
The topology of call dependencies in a layered network makes it possible to partition the model into
a set of layers, each consisting of a subset of the servers. Each of these layers is then solved in isolation,
updating with an iterative procedure its parameters and performance metrics until the layers solutions jointly
converge to a consistent solution.

6.1

Basics about layered networks

Layered network models describe a collection of resources called tasks, each representing for example a
software server, that run on resources called host processors. Classes of service exposed by a task are called
entries. Each entry is an endpoint at which a task can be invoked; for example, if a task represents a web
server then its web pages may be described as different entries.
A special task, called the reference task is used to represent a group of system users. In this case, the
host processor for a reference task can either be real, as in the case of users that are themselves software
systems, or fictitious, as in the case of human users.
Each entry can be specified by a workflow of operations called activities, typically organized as a directed acyclic graph. The time demand that each activity places at the underpinning host processor is called
its host demand and it is a random variable with a user-specified distribution.
Activity graphs may include calls to entries exposed by other tasks. This is an abstraction of the calls that
distributed system components have among themselves. Calls can be synchronous, asynchronous, or for128

6.1. BASICS ABOUT LAYERED NETWORKS

129

warding. Synchronous calls are requests that block the sender until a reply is received, while asynchronous
calls are non-blocking and the sender execution can continue after issuing the call. Calls can either be
repeated either deterministic or stochastic, meaning in the latter case that the number of calls issued is a
random variable, e.g. geometrically distributed.
Forwarding calls provide a mechanism for delegation chains in layered networks. When a task receives
a synchronous request, instead of replying directly to the caller, it can forward the request to another entry
with a given probability. The forwarding task is released immediately (it does not block waiting for the
downstream reply), while the original caller remains blocked until the final entry in the forwarding chain
sends the reply. This semantics is useful for modeling multi-tier systems where a front-end server dispatches
requests to a back-end without itself waiting for the result—the client blocks end-to-end, but intermediate
servers are freed. Forwarding is specified at the entry level using the forward method:
E1.forward(E2, 0.8);

// forward 80% of requests from E1 to E2

Multiple forwarding destinations can be specified for the same entry, provided that the sum of forwarding
probabilities does not exceed one. The remaining probability mass corresponds to the entry replying directly
to its caller. Forwarding calls are serialized in the LQNX format using the <forwarding> XML element
and are supported by the LQNS solver.
Contrary to ordinary layered queueing networks, a layered network in L INE can also feature cache tasks,
item entries, and cache-access precedence relations.
• Cache tasks have the basic properties of tasks, but add three specific properties for caching: the total
number of items, the cache capacity and the cache replacement policy. Cached items can be either
contents or services. Cache capacity indicates the storage constraints of the cache.
• An item-entry provides instead access to a group of entries of a cache, Item-entries have the basic
properties of entries, but add the property of the popularity of the items they give access to.
• A precedence relationship called cache-access is defined for the cache hit and miss activities under
each item-entry. That is, it is possible to proceed to a different activity depending on whether the
cache access produced a cache hit or cache miss. For example, a cache miss can produce a call to a
remote entry to retrieve the missing content.
Note that the above extensions are not queueing-based and this explains why these models are referred to
in L INE as layered networks and not as layered queueing networks. Similar to the latter, the analysis of a
layered networks uses a decomposition of the model into a set of submodels, each being a object, which are
then iterative analyzed using different solution methods.

130

CHAPTER 6. LAYERED NETWORK MODELS

6.2

LayeredNetwork object definition

6.2.1

Creating a layered network topology

A layered queueing network consists of four types of elements: processors, tasks, entries and activities. An
entry is a class of service specified through a finite sequence of activities, and hosted by a task running
on a (physical) processor. A task is typically a software queue that models access to the capacity of the
underpinning processor. Activities model either demands required at the underpinning processor, or calls to
entries exposed by some remote tasks.
In the LayeredNetwork class, the terms host and processor are entirely interchangeable.
To create our first layered network, we instantiate a new model as
LayeredNetwork model = new LayeredNetwork("myLayeredModel");

We now proceed to instantiate the static topology of processors, tasks and entries:
Processor P1 = new Processor(model, "P1", 1, SchedStrategy.PS);
Processor P2 = new Processor(model, "P2", 1, SchedStrategy.PS);
Task T1 = new Task(model, "T1", 5, SchedStrategy.REF).on(P1);
Task T2 = new Task(model, "T2", Integer.MAX_VALUE, SchedStrategy.INF).on(P2);
Entry E1 = new Entry(model, "E1").on(T1);
Entry E2 = new Entry(model, "E2").on(T2);

An equivalent way to specify the above example is to use the Host class instead than the Processor class,
with identical parameters.
In the above code, the on method specifies the associations between the elements, e.g., task T1 runs on
processor P1, and accepts calls to entry E1. Furthermore, the multiplicity of T1 is 5, meaning that up to 5
calls can be simultaneously served by this element (i.e., 5 is the multiplicity of servers in the underpinning
queueing system for T1).
Both processors and tasks can be associated to the standard L INE scheduling strategies. For instance,
T2 will process incoming requests in parallel according as an infinite server node, since we selected the
SchedStrategy.INF scheduling policy. An exception is that SchedStrategy.REF should be used to
denote the reference task (e.g. a node representing the clients of the models), which has a similar meaning
to the reference node in the object.

6.2.2

FunctionTask

The FunctionTask class extends Task to model serverless functions and function-as-a-service (FaaS)
systems. It adds two additional timing properties characteristic of serverless environments:
• Setup time (cold start): the initialization delay incurred when a function instance is started.
• Delay-off time (teardown): the delay incurred when a function instance is terminated.
A FunctionTask can be instantiated as follows:

6.2. LAYEREDNETWORK OBJECT DEFINITION

131

FunctionTask F1 = new FunctionTask(model, "F1", 4, SchedStrategy.FCFS).on(P1);
F1.setSetupTime(new Exp(1.0));
// cold start time (mean = 1.0)
F1.setDelayOffTime(new Exp(2.0));
// teardown time (mean = 2.0)

Both setSetupTime and setDelayOffTime accept either a numeric value (which creates an exponential distribution with the given mean) or a Distribution object. A complete example is provided in
lqn_function in the examples/ folder.

6.2.3

Cache tasks

The CacheTask class extends Task to model in-memory caches embedded in a layered network. A cache
task stores up to a finite number of items chosen out of a catalogue, evicting them according to a configurable
replacement policy. Cached items are exposed to the rest of the model as ItemEntry objects, which behave
like ordinary entries but are additionally annotated with a discrete popularity distribution describing how
frequently each item is requested.
The CacheTask constructor takes the following arguments:
• model: the parent LayeredNetwork;
• name: a unique task name;
• nitems: the catalogue size, i.e., the total number of distinct items that may be requested;
• itemLevelCap: cache capacity. A scalar value specifies the size of a single-level cache, while a row
vector specifies per-level capacities for a multi-level cache hierarchy (e.g., [2,4] for an L1 of size 2
and an L2 of size 4);
• replStrat: a ReplacementStrategy enum value. The supported policies are ReplacementStrategy.RR
(random replacement), ReplacementStrategy.FIFO, ReplacementStrategy.SFIFO (strict FIFO),
and ReplacementStrategy.LRU;
• multiplicity (optional, default 1): number of concurrent threads that may serve cache accesses;
• scheduling (optional, default SchedStrategy.FCFS): scheduling discipline used when multiple
requests compete for the cache.

An ItemEntry extends Entry with a popularity descriptor and is constructed as ItemEntry(model,
name, cardinality, popularityDistribution), where cardinality is the number of items reachable through the entry and popularityDistribution is a discrete Distribution object (e.g., DiscreteSampler
or Zipf). The hit/miss outcome of a cache access is then routed in the activity graph using the ActivityPrecedence.Cach
construct (see Section ??).
The following example defines a single-host LQN where a client task T1 issues calls to a cache task C2
hosting four items with capacity two and a round-robin eviction policy: The two post-cache activities passed

132

CHAPTER 6. LAYERED NETWORK MODELS

to CacheAccess are interpreted in order: the first is executed on a cache hit, the second on a cache miss.
A complete worked example is given in lcq_singlehost in the examples/advanced/layeredCQ/
folder; lcq_threehosts illustrates a hierarchical, multi-tier cache configuration.

6.2.4

Replication and fan-out

Layered networks support replication of processors and tasks, together with explicit fan-in and fan-out
annotations on synchronous and asynchronous calls. Replication multiplies a single declared element into
a number of identical copies that share the same activity graph but provide independent service capacity,
and is the recommended way to model horizontally scaled microservices, server farms, or any tier with a
number of equivalent instances.
The setReplication method on Processor and Task sets the replica count r ≥ 1. The setFanOut(dest,
value) method on Task declares that each replica of the calling task issues calls to value replicas of the
called task dest; symmetrically, setFanIn(source, value) declares that each replica of the called
task receives calls from value replicas of the source task. The product of fan-in and fan-out values must be
consistent with the replica counts of the two tasks involved in each call. The lqn_sockshop example in the
examples/basic/layeredModel/ folder demonstrates a microservice-style topology in which an edge
task T1 is replicated 2× and front-end / back-end tasks declare fan-in and fan-out values around it: Fanout destinations and fan-in sources are referenced by task name, so the corresponding tasks must already
exist (or be created later in the model). Multiple fan-out destinations may be specified by repeated calls to
setFanOut; each call appends a new (destination, value) pair.

6.2.5

Describing host demands of entries

The demands placed by an entry on the underpinning host (also called in layered queueing networks the
host demand) is described in terms of execution of one or more activities. Although in tools such as LQNS
activities can be associated to either entries or tasks, L INE supports only the more general of the two options,
i.e., the definition of activities at the level of tasks. In this case:
• Every task defines a collection of activities.
• Every entry needs to specify an initial activity where the execution of the entry starts (the activity
is said to be “bound to the entry”) and a replying activity, which upon completion terminates the
execution of the entry.
For example, in our running example, we may now associate an activity to each entry as follows:
Activity A1 = new Activity(model, "A1", new Exp(1.0)).on(T1).boundTo(E1).synchCall(E2,3.5);
Activity A2 = new Activity(model, "A2", new Exp(2.0)).on(T2).boundTo(E2).repliesTo(E2);

Here, A1 is a task activity for T1, acts as initial activity for E1, consumes an exponentially distributed time on
the processor underpinning T1, and requires on average 3.5 synchronous calls to E2 to complete. Each call

6.2. LAYEREDNETWORK OBJECT DEFINITION

133

to entry E2 is served by the activity A2, with a demand on the processor hosting T2 given by an exponential
distribution with rate λ = 2.0.
Activity graphs
Often, it is useful to structure the sequence of activities carried out by an entry in a graph. Activity graphs
can be characterized by precedence relationships of the following kinds:
• sequence: two activities are executed sequentially, one after each other. This is implemented through
the ActivityPrecedence.Serial construct.
• loop: an activity is repeated a number of times. This is implemented in ActivityPrecedence.Loop.
• and-fork: a serial execution is forked into concurrent activities. This can be materialized using the
ActivityPrecedence.AndFork construct.
• or-fork: the server chooses probabilistically which activity to execute next among a set of alternatives.
This is implemented in ActivityPrecedence.OrFork.
• and-join: concurrent activities are joined into a single serial execution. This is implemented in
ActivityPrecedence.AndJoin.
• or-join: merge point for alternative activities that may execute in parallel after a or-fork. This is
implemented in ActivityPrecedence.OrJoin.

• cache-access: split point for cache hit/cache miss results in an activity graph. This is implemented in
ActivityPrecedence.CacheAccess. For usage examples, see cache_replc_lru and cache_compare_replc
in the examples/ folder.
A composite example showing fork/join precedences and loops is given in lqn_workflows in the examples/
folder.
AND-fork and AND-join activity precedences play a central role in modeling parallel execution patterns
within layered queueing networks, enabling representation of concurrent task execution and subsequent
synchronization. When an activity reaches an AND-fork precedence, it spawns multiple parallel execution
paths that proceed independently until they converge at a corresponding AND-join. Each forked branch
can contain arbitrary sequences of activities, including service demands on processors, synchronous calls
to lower-layer entries, and even nested fork-join structures. The semantics of AND-fork in layered networks differ subtly from fork-join constructs in traditional queueing networks because activities are bound
to tasks and processors, introducing resource contention at both the activity level and the processor level.
Cross-layer synchronization occurs when activities in different branches make synchronous calls to entries
located in separate layers of the model, requiring coordination between the completion of service at multiple
servers before the join can proceed. The join point blocks until all branches spawned by the corresponding fork have completed their execution, at which point a single thread of control resumes and proceeds

134

CHAPTER 6. LAYERED NETWORK MODELS

to subsequent activities. This blocking behavior at the join creates dependencies that propagate across layers, as the response time of a high-level task depends on the maximum completion time across all parallel
branches, which in turn depends on the response times of lower-layer services invoked from those branches.
Task completion detection in layered networks must account for the fact that a task finishes processing an
entry request only after all activities in the entry’s activity graph have executed, including waiting for all
branches of any AND-fork to synchronize at their corresponding AND-join. Solvers analyze these fork-join
structures by constructing auxiliary queueing network models where each branch between a fork and join is
represented as a separate subnetwork, computing the distribution of completion times for each branch, and
then determining the distribution of the maximum completion time which governs the join synchronization
delay. The LN solver uses matrix-geometric methods and moment-matching techniques to approximate
these maximum distributions, while the LQNS solver employs iterative methods that decompose the layered
model into separate queueing networks for each layer and refine their parameterization until convergence.
The lqn_workflows example demonstrates a realistic scenario with multiple AND-fork/AND-join pairs
spanning several layers, illustrating how business process workflows with parallel task execution can be
modeled and analyzed using the layered queueing network abstraction.
For instance, we may replace in the running example the specification of the activities underpinning a
call to E2 as
Activity A20 = new Activity(model, "A20", new Exp(1.0)).on(T2).boundTo(E2);
Activity A21 = new Activity(model, "A21", Erlang.fitMeanAndOrder(1.0,2)).on(T2);
Activity A22 = new Activity(model, "A22", new Exp(1.0)).on(T2).repliesTo(E2);
T2.addPrecedence(ActivityPrecedence.Serial(A20, A21, A22));

such that a call to E2 serially executes A20, A21, and A22 prior to replying. Here, A21 is chosen to be an
Erlang distribution with given mean (1.0) and number of phases (2).
OrFork with branch probabilities
The OrFork construct (also available as Xor) selects probabilistically between alternative successors of a
single activity. The third argument is a row vector of branch probabilities whose entries sum to one and are
listed in the same order as the destination activities: Here, after completing A20 the task executes A21 with
probability 0.3 and A22 with probability 0.7.
Loop precedence
The Loop construct repeats a body activity a configurable number of times before continuing with a successor. In its three-argument form Loop(preAct, {loopBody, endAct}, count), the activity preAct
is executed once, then loopBody is executed count times, and finally endAct runs once before exiting the
loop: A four-argument form Loop(preAct, loopBody, endAct, counts) is also accepted as a more
explicit equivalent.

6.2. LAYEREDNETWORK OBJECT DEFINITION

135

AndJoin with quorum
By default, AndJoin blocks until all parallel branches spawned by the matching AndFork have completed.
The optional third argument quorum relaxes this synchronization so that the join fires as soon as any quorum
of its predecessors have reported completion, modeling early-reply patterns and partial joins: The example
releases A24 as soon as any two of A21, A22, A23 have completed.
CacheAccess precedence
The CacheAccess construct routes the control flow downstream of a cache lookup based on the lookup
outcome. The post-cache activity list is interpreted positionally: the first element is the hit branch, the
second the miss branch: This precedence is meaningful only when preAct is bound to an ItemEntry of a
CacheTask; see Section 6.2.3 for the cache modeling primitives.

6.2.6

Activity configuration

Beyond the host demand specified at construction time, individual activities expose a number of methods
that influence how they participate in the activity graph and in the analysis.
Two-phase activities (setPhase). The two-phase model allows part of an activity’s execution to be carried out after a synchronous reply has been sent to the caller. Activities are by default in phase 1 (executed
before the reply) and can be moved to phase 2 (executed after the reply, while the caller proceeds in parallel)
using A.setPhase(2). Only phase values of 1 or 2 are accepted. Phase-2 activities show up in the layered
network struct under the actthink_* fields.
Per-activity think time (setThinkTime). An activity can carry an additional think-time component, separate from the host demand and from the task-level think time, modeling for example a deferred operation.
The method A.setThinkTime(d) accepts either a numeric mean (which produces an exponential distribution) or any Distribution object. A zero or negligible mean is automatically replaced by an Immediate
distribution.
Asynchronous calls (asynchCall). In addition to synchCall, an activity can issue non-blocking calls
to entries of other tasks via A.asynchCall(E, m). The destination E can be passed either as an Entry
object or by name; the second argument m is the mean number of calls per activity execution and defaults
to 1.0. Multiple distinct destinations can be added by repeated calls, but a single destination cannot be
registered twice – to model multiple calls to the same entry, increase m accordingly.
Open arrivals at entries (Entry.setArrival). An entry can be turned into an open arrival point by
attaching an arrival distribution. The method E.setArrival(dist) accepts any Distribution object,
e.g., Exp(2.5) for Poisson arrivals at rate 2.5 or Erlang(2,0.4) for an Erlang-2 stream. Open-arrival

136

CHAPTER 6. LAYERED NETWORK MODELS

entries surface in the layered network struct through the arrival_* fields and let the entry serve external
workload alongside (or instead of) calls received from a reference task.

6.2.7

Debugging and visualization

The structure of a LayeredNetwork object can be graphically visualized as follows
model.view();

model.view();

The jsimgView and jsimwView methods can be used to visualize in JMT each layer. This can be
done by first calling the getLayers method to obtain a list consisting of the Network objects, each one
corresponding to a layer, and then invoking the jsimgView and jsimwView methods on the desired layer.
This is discussed in more details in the next section.
Lastly, we note a number of specification issues that trigger errors in the LQN definition:
Error Type
Activity in REF task replies
Entry on task calls itself
Entry on task calls entry on the same task
Cycle in activity graph
Unsupported replyTo
Activity with boundTo specification

6.3

Internals

6.3.1

Representation of the model structure

Error Type
Entry called both synchronously and asynchronously
Repeated definition of parent task
Invalid .on() argument for an activity
Invalid .on() argument for a task
Repeated synch calls
Repeated asynch calls

It is possible to access the internal representation of a LayeredNetwork model in a similar way as for
objects, i.e.:
LayeredNetworkStruct lqn = model.getStruct();

The return lqn structure, of class LayeredNetworkStruct, contains all the information about the specified model. It relies on relative and absolute indexing for the elements of the LayeredNetwork.
• A relative index is a number between 1 and the number of similar elements in the model, e.g., for a
model with 3 tasks, the relative index t of a task would be a number in [1, 3].

6.3. INTERNALS

137

• An absolute index is a number between 1 and the total number of elements (of any kind, except calls)
in the model, e.g., for a model with 2 hosts, 3 tasks, 5 entries, and 8 activities, the total number of
elements is nidx= 18 and last activity a may have an absolute index aidx= 18 and a relative index
a= 8.
• The difference between the relative and the absolute index of an element is referred to as shift, e.g., in
the previous example ashift= 18 − 8 = 10.
• Absolute and relative indexing for calls and hosts are identical, call index cidx ranges in [1, ncalls]
and host index hidx ranges in [1, nhosts].
Using the above convention, the internal representation of the model is described in Table 6.1. As in the
examples above, relative and absolute indexes are differentiated by using the suffix idx in the latter (e.g., a
vs. aidx). This indexing style is used throughout the codebase as well.
The LayeredNetworkStruct class in the JAR version provides the internal representation using
Java/Kotlin data structures. Table 6.1 lists the main properties available.
Table 6.1: LayeredNetworkStruct static properties (JAR version)
Field

Type

nidx
nhosts
ntasks
nentries
nacts
ncalls
hshift

int
int
int
int
int
int
int

tshift
eshift

int
int

ashift

int

cshift

int

tasksof

Map〈Integer,
List〈Integer〉〉
Map〈Integer,
List〈Integer〉〉
Map〈Integer,
List〈Integer〉〉
Map〈Integer,
List〈Integer〉〉
Map〈Integer,
Distribution〉
Map〈Integer,
ProcessType〉
Map〈Integer,
Matrix〉

entriesof
actsof
callsof
hostdem
hostdem_type
hostdem_params

Description
Total number of LayeredNetwork elements
Number of Hosts or Processor elements
Number of Tasks elements
Number of Entry elements
Number of Activity elements
Number of calls issued by Activity elements
For host h, the value h+hshift returns its absolute index in
1...nidx
For task t, the value t+tshift returns its absolute index in 1...nidx
For entry e, the value e+eshift returns its absolute index in
1...nidx
For activity a, the value a+ashift returns its absolute index in
1...nidx
For call c, the value c+cshift returns its absolute index in
1...ncalls
Map from host absolute index to list of task absolute indexes on that host
Map from task absolute index to list of entry absolute indexes on that task
Map from entry/task absolute index to list of activity absolute indexes
Map from activity absolute index to list of call absolute indexes
(Deprecated) Host demand distribution for each element by absolute index
Host demand distribution type by absolute index
Host demand distribution parameters by absolute index
Continued on next page

138

Field

hostdem_mean

CHAPTER 6. LAYERED NETWORK MODELS
Table 6.1 – Continued from previous page
Description
Map〈Integer,
Host demand mean by absolute index
Type

mult
maxmult
repl
type

Double〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
MatrixCell〉
Map〈Integer,
Distribution〉
Map〈Integer,
ProcessType〉
Map〈Integer,
Matrix〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
MatrixCell〉
Map〈Integer,
Distribution〉
Map〈Integer,
ProcessType〉
Map〈Integer,
Matrix〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
MatrixCell〉
Map〈Integer,
SchedStrategy〉
Map〈Integer,
String〉
Map〈Integer,
String〉
Matrix
Matrix
Matrix
Matrix

nitems

Matrix

itemcap

Map〈Integer,
Integer〉
Matrix
ReplacementStrategy id for cache task by absolute index
Map〈Integer,
(Deprecated) Item popularity distribution for ItemEntry by absoDiscreteDistribution〉
lute index
Map〈Integer,
Item popularity distribution type by absolute index
ProcessType〉
Map〈Integer,
Item popularity distribution parameters by absolute index
Matrix〉

hostdem_scv
hostdem_proc
think
think_type
think_params
think_mean
think_scv
think_proc
actthink
actthink_type
actthink_params
actthink_mean
actthink_scv
actthink_proc
sched
names
hashnames

replacestrat
itemproc
itemproc_type
itemproc_params

Host demand squared coefficient of variation by absolute index
Host demand process representation (PH/MAP) by absolute index
(Deprecated) Think time distribution for each element by absolute index
Think time distribution type by absolute index
Think time distribution parameters by absolute index
Think time mean by absolute index
Think time squared coefficient of variation by absolute index
Think time process representation (PH/MAP) by absolute index
(Deprecated) Activity think time distribution by absolute index
Activity think time distribution type by absolute index
Activity think time distribution parameters by absolute index
Activity think time mean by absolute index
Activity think time squared coefficient of variation by absolute index
Activity think time process representation (PH/MAP) by absolute index
Scheduling strategy for host or task by absolute index
Name of element by absolute index
Name with type prefix by absolute index (“H:” host, “R:” reference task,
“T:” task, “C:” cache task, “E:” entry, “I:” item entry, “A:” activity)
Multiplicity for host or task by absolute index
Maximum multiplicity for host or task by absolute index
Replication factor for host or task by absolute index
LayeredNetworkElement type id for element by absolute index
Number of items in CacheTask or ItemEntry by absolute index
Cache capacity for cache list by absolute index

Continued on next page

6.3. INTERNALS

Field

itemproc_mean
itemproc_scv
itemproc_proc
calltype
callpair
callproc

139
Table 6.1 – Continued from previous page
Description
Map〈Integer,
Item popularity mean by absolute index
Type

Double〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
MatrixCell〉
Map〈Integer,
CallType〉
Matrix

Item popularity squared coefficient of variation by absolute index
Item popularity process representation by absolute index

CallType for call by call index
Call relationship matrix: column 1 = activity issuing call, column 2 =
entry being called
(Deprecated) Number of calls distribution by call absolute index

actpretype

Map〈Integer,
DiscreteDistribution〉
Map〈Integer,
Call count distribution type by call absolute index
ProcessType〉
Map〈Integer,
Call count distribution parameters by call absolute index
Matrix〉
Map〈Integer,
Call count mean by call absolute index
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
Call count squared coefficient of variation by call absolute index
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
Call count process representation by call absolute index
MatrixCell〉
Map〈Integer,
Name of call by call absolute index
String〉
Map〈Integer,
Call name with type prefixes for source and destination
String〉
Matrix
ActivityPrecedenceType id before activity by absolute

actposttype

Matrix

graph

Matrix

dag
parent
replygraph
taskgraph
iscache
iscaller
issynccaller
isasynccaller
isref
isfunction
setuptime

Matrix
Matrix
Matrix
Matrix
Matrix
Matrix
Matrix
Matrix
Matrix
Matrix
Map〈Integer,
Distribution〉
Map〈Integer,
ProcessType〉
Map〈Integer,
Matrix〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉

callproc_type
callproc_params
callproc_mean
callproc_scv
callproc_proc
callnames
callhashnames

index

setuptime_type
setuptime_params
setuptime_mean
setuptime_scv

ActivityPrecedenceType id after activity by absolute index
Adjacency matrix: ̸= 0 if element i “runs on”, “calls” or “precedes” element j
Directed acyclic graph version of graph with flipped entry-task edges
Parent element absolute index for each element
True if activity replies, ending the entry call
True if host/task i calls host/task j
True if task is a CacheTask
True if element i calls element j
True if element i issues synchronous call to element j
True if element i issues asynchronous call to element j
True if task is a reference task
True if task is a function task
(Deprecated) Setup time distribution by absolute index
Setup time distribution type by absolute index
Setup time distribution parameters by absolute index
Setup time mean by absolute index
Setup time squared coefficient of variation by absolute index
Continued on next page

140

CHAPTER 6. LAYERED NETWORK MODELS

Field

setuptime_proc
delayofftime
delayofftime_type
delayofftime_params
delayofftime_mean
delayofftime_scv
delayofftime_proc
arrival
arrival_type
arrival_params
arrival_mean
arrival_scv
arrival_proc
conntasks
hitmissaidx
hitaidx
missaidx

6.3.2

Table 6.1 – Continued from previous page
Description
Map〈Integer,
Setup time process representation (PH/MAP) by absolute index
Type

MatrixCell〉
Map〈Integer,
Distribution〉
Map〈Integer,
ProcessType〉
Map〈Integer,
Matrix〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
MatrixCell〉
Map〈Integer,
Distribution〉
Map〈Integer,
ProcessType〉
Map〈Integer,
Matrix〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
Double〉
Map〈Integer,
MatrixCell〉
Matrix
List〈Integer〉
Integer
Integer

(Deprecated) Delay-off time distribution by absolute index
Delay-off time distribution type by absolute index
Delay-off time distribution parameters by absolute index
Delay-off time mean by absolute index
Delay-off time squared coefficient of variation by absolute index
Delay-off time process representation (PH/MAP) by absolute index
(Deprecated) Open arrival distribution for entries by absolute index
Arrival distribution type by absolute index
Arrival distribution parameters by absolute index
Arrival mean by absolute index
Arrival squared coefficient of variation by absolute index
Arrival process representation (PH/MAP) by absolute index
Connected tasks matrix
List of hit/miss activity absolute indexes
Hit activity absolute index
Miss activity absolute index

Decomposition into layers

Layers are a form of decomposition where we model the performance of one or more servers. The activity
of clients not detailed in that layer is taken into account through an artificial delay station, placed in a closed
loop to the servers [62]. This artificial delay is used to model the inter-arrival time between calls issued by
that client.
The current version of L INE adopts SRVN-type layering [31], whereby a layer corresponds to one and
only one resource, either a processor or a task. The getLayers method returns a cell array consisting of
the objects corresponding to each layer
\texttt{List\textlangle Network\textrangle} layers = model.getLayers();

The decomposition is performed through the LN solver described later.
Within each layer, classes are used to model the time a job spends in a given activity or call, with
synchronous calls being modeled by classed with label including an arrow, e.g., "AS1=>E3" is a closed
class used represent synchronous calls from activity AS1 to entry E3, whereas "AS1->E3" denotes an

6.4. SOLVERS

141

asynchronous call. Artificial delays and reference nodes are modelled as a delay station named ’Clients’,
whereas the task or processor assigned to the layer is modelled as the other node in the layer.

6.4

Solvers

L INE offers two solvers for the solution of a LayeredNetwork model consisting in its own native solver
(LN) and a wrapper (LQNS) to the LQNS solver [31]. The latter requires a distribution of LQNS to be
available on the operating system command line.
The LQNS solver is a mature external tool developed by the Real-time and Distributed Systems Group
at Carleton University that implements a variety of solution methods for layered queueing networks. When
invoked from L INE, the LQNS wrapper generates an XML input file conforming to the LQN model specification, spawns the external LQNS executable as a subprocess, and parses the XML output to extract performance metrics. The LQNS solver supports multiple solution methods selectable through solver options,
including exact analytical methods for models that satisfy product-form conditions, iterative approximation methods based on mean value analysis for general layered networks, and simulation-based approaches
for models with features not amenable to analytical solution. Method selection in LQNS is controlled by
command-line flags passed to the external solver, with common options including the convergence tolerance
for iterative methods, the maximum number of iterations, and the choice between exact Markov chain analysis versus approximate decomposition. The comparison between the LN solver (native to L INE) and LQNS
reveals different strengths and trade-offs. The LN solver converts the layered network into a collection of
ordinary queueing networks with artificial delay stations representing cross-layer synchronization, then employs MVA or other queueing network solvers iteratively until the delays converge to consistent values. This
approach benefits from the full range of queueing network solution methods available in L INE and provides
tighter integration with other L INE features such as optimization and sensitivity analysis. In contrast, LQNS
uses specialized layered network algorithms that directly exploit the hierarchical structure without intermediate conversion, potentially achieving faster convergence for deeply nested models or those with complex
precedence relationships. LQNS is preferred over the LN solver when analyzing very large layered models
where the conversion to queueing networks would create excessive numbers of artificial classes or when
using specialized LQNS features such as quorum joins or non-exponential think times that are not yet fully
supported in the LN conversion process. Conversely, the LN solver with MVA backend is preferable when
the model is relatively small, when exact product-form results are desired, or when integration with L INE
workflows such as automated parameter sweeps or ensemble analysis is important. Both solvers produce
comparable results for standard layered queueing network models, with discrepancies typically arising only
in corner cases involving unusual combinations of scheduling disciplines, replication, or activity precedence
patterns.
The solution methods available for LayeredNetwork models are similar to those for Network objects.
For example, the avgTable can be used to obtain a full set of mean performance indexes for the model,
e.g.,
Table avgTable = new LQNS(model).avgTable();

142

CHAPTER 6. LAYERED NETWORK MODELS
avgTable.print();

Note that in the above table, some performance indexes are marked as NaN because they are not defined in a
layered queueing network. Further, compared to the avgTable method in objects, LayeredNetwork do
not have an explicit differentiation between stations and classes, since in a layer a task may either act as a
server station or a client class.
The main challenge in solving layered queueing networks through analytical methods is that the parameterization of the artificial delays depends on the steady-state performance of the other layers, thus causing
a cyclic dependence between input parameters and solutions across the layers. Depending on the solver in
use, such issue can be addressed in a different way, but in general a decomposition into layers will remain
parametric on a set of response times, throughputs and utilizations.
This issue can be resolved through solvers that, starting from an initial guess, cyclically analyze the
layers and update their artificial delays on the basis of the results of these analyses. Both LN and LQNS
implement this solution method. Normally, after a number of iterations the model converges to a steadystate solution, where the parameterization of the artificial delays does not change after additional iterations.

6.4.1

LQNS

The LQNS wrapper operates by first transforming the specification into a valid LQNS XML file. Subsequently, LQNS calls the solver and parses the results from disks in order to present them to the user in the
appropriate L INE tables or vectors. The options.method can be used to configure the LQNS execution
as follows:
• options.method="default" or "lqns": LQNS analytical solver with default settings.
• options.method="exactmva": the solver will execute the standard LQNS analytical solver with
the exact MVA method.
• options.method="srvn": LQNS analytical solver with SRVN layering.
• options.method="srvn.exactmva": the solver will execute the standard LQNS analytical solver
with SRVN layering and the exact MVA method.
• options.method="sim" or "lqsim": LQSIM simulator, with simulation length specified via the
samples field (i.e., with parameter -A options.samples, 0.95).
• options.method="lqnsdefault": alias of default retained for backward compatibility with
earlier scripts.
Upon invocation, the lqns or lqsim commands will be searched for in the system path. If they are unavailable, the termination of LQNS will interrupt.
The pragma string passed to lqns can be customised through additional configuration entries. The
most commonly used are options.config.interlocking, which forwards an -Pinterlocking=...

6.4. SOLVERS

143

pragma to control how interlocked tasks are handled (’true’, ’false’, or ’no-throughput’), and
options.config.multiserver, which forwards an -Pmultiserver=... pragma selecting the LQNS
multi-server approximation (e.g. ’conway’, ’reiser’, ’rolia’, ’zhou’, ’schmidt’). Both options
are passed verbatim to the back-end and therefore accept any value supported by the installed LQNS version.
Remote Docker execution
As an alternative to local installation of the LQNS tools, L INE supports remote execution via a Docker
container running the lqns-rest API. This is useful when LQNS binaries are not available locally or when
running on systems where compilation is difficult. To enable remote execution, configure the following
options:
• options.config.remote = true: Enable remote execution via REST API.
• options.config.remote_url = "http://localhost:8080": URL of the lqns-rest server
(default port is 8080).
The Docker container can be started using the imperialqore/lqns-rest image extended with the REST
API. When remote execution is enabled, the model is serialized to LQNX format and sent via HTTP POST
to the remote server, which executes the solver and returns the results. This approach supports all solver
methods (lqns, lqsim, etc.) and pragmas available in the local execution mode.

6.4.2

LN

The native LN solver iteratively applies the layer updates until convergence of the steady-state measures.
Since updates are parametric on the solution of each layer, LN can apply any of the solvers described in
the solvers chapter to the analysis of individual layers, as illustrated in the following example for the MVA
solver
SolverOptions options = LN.defaultOptions();
SolverOptions mvaopt = MVA.defaultOptions();
new LN(model, layer -> new MVA(layer, mvaopt), options).avgTable().print();

Options parameters may also be omitted. The LN method converges when the maximum relative change of
mean response times across layers from the last iteration is less than options.iter_tol.
Methods supported by the LN solver include:
• options.method="default": default recursive solution based on mean values
• options.method="moment3": solution by recursive 3-moment approximation of response time
distributions. This method matches the first three moments (mean, variance, skewness) of response
times at each layer by fitting acyclic phase-type distributions, improving accuracy for non-exponential
service demands compared to the default mean-value method.

144

CHAPTER 6. LAYERED NETWORK MODELS
• options.method="mol": Method of Layers iteration with nested inner/outer loops for task and
host layers.

Relaxation and MoL controls. The convergence behaviour of the layered iteration is governed by a family of options.config entries:
• options.config.relaxsource, options.config.relaxservt, options.config.relaxcallservt:
per-quantity relaxation factors (default 0.5) applied to source throughputs, service times, and call service times respectively when blending the new and previous iterates. Smaller values yield more
conservative updates and improve convergence on stiff models.
• options.config.relaxmin and options.config.relaxmax: lower and upper clamps on the
relaxation factor used by the adaptive damping scheme.
• options.config.mol_outer_iter_max and options.config.mol_inner_iter_max: maximum number of outer (task) and inner (host) iterations executed by the mol method before convergence is declared a failure.
• options.config.mol_inner_iter_tol: tolerance applied to the inner host-layer iteration of the
mol method, normally tighter than options.iter_tol which controls the outer task-layer loop.
State transfer and solver switching
The LN solver supports transferring its internal convergence state between solver instances, enabling hybrid
solving schemes where a fast solver provides initial estimates that a more accurate solver then refines. This
avoids restarting the iterative decomposition from scratch when switching solvers.
Three methods are provided:
• getState(): exports the current solver state, including service time processes, throughputs, utilizations, and relaxation parameters.
• setState(state): imports a previously exported state into a new solver instance, allowing it to
continue from the previous solution.
• updateSolver(solverFactory): replaces the per-layer solver while preserving the current convergence state.
A typical use case is to obtain a quick initial solution with MVA and then refine it with a simulation-based
solver:
// Fast initial analysis with MVA
SolverLN solver1 = new SolverLN(model, layer -> new SolverMVA(layer));
solver1.getAvgTable();
SolverLNState state = solver1.getState();

6.5. CONVERSION BETWEEN NETWORK AND LAYEREDNETWORK MODELS

145

// Refine with NC solver
SolverLN solver2 = new SolverLN(model, layer -> new SolverNC(layer));
solver2.setState(state);
solver2.getAvgTable();

6.5

Conversion between Network and LayeredNetwork models

L INE provides two converters that bridge the Network (queueing network) and LayeredNetwork (layered
queueing network) abstractions. These converters are useful when one wishes to apply a layered solver to
an ordinary queueing network, or vice versa to analyse a layered model with a flat queueing network solver.

6.5.1

From Network to LayeredNetwork

The function QN2LQN maps a closed queueing network into a layered queueing network. Each closed chain
is modelled by a reference task whose entries replicate the chain’s visit pattern, and each queueing or delay
station is mapped onto a processor hosting the corresponding task. Routing probabilities and class switching are reproduced through OR-fork activity precedences. Open classes (Source/Sink) are not currently
supported by this converter and the input model must be closed. The conversion is invoked as The QN2LQN
converter is invoked automatically by the QNS solver in M ATLAB when the input model lacks a product-form
solution and contains only closed classes; in this case the model is converted on the fly and dispatched to
LQNS.

6.5.2

From LayeredNetwork to Network

The reverse converter LQN2QN maps a LayeredNetwork into an extended queueing network in which synchronous calls are realised through reply signal classes (SignalType.REPLY). The caller class is blocked
at the calling station until the reply class returns from the callee, and a class switch at the leaf node restores
the caller class so that the request cycle can repeat. Phase-2 activities, when present, are mapped onto forkjoin constructs so that the post-reply work is executed in parallel with the released caller. The conversion is
invoked as This route is useful for validating an LN or LQNS solution against discrete-event simulation, since
the resulting network can be analysed with any solver that supports signal classes (currently LDES and JMT).

6.6

Model import and export

A LayeredNetwork can be easily read from, or written to, a XML file based on the LQNS meta-model
format1 . The read operation can be done using a static method of the LayeredNetwork class, i.e.,
1

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/layeredqueuing/V5/master/xml/lqn.xsd

146

CHAPTER 6. LAYERED NETWORK MODELS

LayeredNetwork model = LayeredNetwork.parseXML(filename);

Conversely, the write operation is invoked directly on the model object
model.writeXML(filename);

In both examples, filename is a string including both file name and its path.
Finally, we point out that it is possible to export a LQN in the legacy SRVN file format2 by means of the
writeSRVN(filename) function.

6.6.1

Ensemble merging

The Ensemble.merge function combines multiple independent models into a single Network containing
disconnected subnetworks. Node and class names are prefixed with their model name to prevent conflicts,
while all Source and Sink nodes are merged into single MergedSource and MergedSink nodes.
Network mergedModel = Ensemble.merge(Arrays.asList(model1, model2));

2

http://www.sce.carleton.ca/rads/lqns/lqn-documentation/format.pdf

